---
layout: post
title: "PCA, a new kid is in town"
description: ""
headline: "the missing pieces"
categories: ML
tags: [sparsity,PCA]
imagefeature: draw-on-board.jpg
comments: true
mathjax: true
featured: false
published: true
---

How far will you guess the Principal Component Analysis, PCA, can be traced back? According to [this article](http://imedea.uib-csic.es/master/cambioglobal/Modulo_V_cod101615/Theory/lit_support/pca_wold.pdf  "Title"), PCA was developed in early 20 century, 1901 to be exactly. It started gaining the popularity in 1930s.  Since then, it has been widely applied in the social science researches. But don’t think PCA a less rigid methodology because of its popularity in social science. In fact, PCA is derived from solid mathematical method. Can we explain PCA with less jargons as possible?   I’d like to give it a try.

PCA belongs to a category of statistical method, called multiple variable analysis. By multiple, it can be a lot. Say we conduct an online survey of 100 questions and that’s 100 variables or dimensions.  Experience tells us that often time the questions were interrelated. Sometime, several questions were even asking the same things but in different ways. Intuitively, we know this is not a 100-dimension problem. But how do we get it down to less dimensions?  That’s where PCA comes in. It provides a way to reduce the original problem to less dimensions.  That’s why PCA is also referred as a dimension reduction method. 



When most elements of a relative matrix are zero, we may say this matrix sparse. We often prefer the matries to be sparse, because they can be stored with less memory and computed faster with dedicate data structure and algorithms. Essentially, sparse encoding is a technique which convert a dense (data) matrix to sparse matrix. This may sound just like principal component analysis, PCA. However, the two have totally different approaches. 

<!--more-->

Consider a 100-question survey, when 500 samples' data collected it can be represented as a 100 by 500 matrix. Experience tells us, often time the questions are interrelated. Sometime, several questions are even asking the same things but in different ways. Intuitively, we know this is not a 100-dimension problem. Let's say it is an x-dimension problem. We cannot just pick x most important questions out of the 100, because questions are relative, or in statistic jargon, dependent. PCA is a technique to helps to find the x dimensions.


